Israel has again denounced the
international criminal court on Monday
the Court's Chief prosecutor requested a
warrant for the arrest of Israel's prime
minister and defense minister over the
war in Gaza in a statement spokesperson
for prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu
urged nations of the Civilized free
world to oppose and condemn the decision
several of Israel's Western allies
including the US and Germany have
criticize the Court's move saying it
equates Israel's actions in Gaza with
hamas's October 7th terrorist attack
hamus leaders are also wanted by the
court and let's bring in now Brussels
correspondent Rosie Berard who's been
following this for us Rosie how are EU
leaders reacting to Israel's appeal to
ignore any warrants requested by the
ICC well like with so much of the eu's
response to this conflict really since
the early days the European Union is
divided no different here we've had
different responses from across the eu's
27 member states so for example here in
Belgium where I am we've had a statement
from the country saying that this is uh
this request for an arrest warrant from
the IC is an important step in
investigations into the situation in
Palestine that's according to belgian's
foreign minister the way she described
it we heard similar statements from
Slovenia then when it came to France
France has its foreign office has
released a statement saying that really
for months the French government has
been warning about the importance of
compliance with International law in
Gaza particularly highlighting the
importance of humanitarian access
Germany on the other hand has said it in
theory supports the ICC thinks this is a
very important achievement of the
International Community but it has
criticized what it sees as the idea that
the the court came forward with an
application for on the one hand Israeli
leaders but also Hamas leaders and
Germany has said that seems to create an
implication or false implication of
equivalence and then really at the far
end of the spectrum we have the
Hungarian prime minister Victor Orban
who has called the application from the
ICC for this arrest warrant shameful so
that is something you can see as once
again EU countries divided on how to
move forward on this conflict and
divided again I should say in this case
from the United States we've heard a
different view from Joe Biden who has
called this request for a warrant
outrageous well moving forward what do
you expect to happen
next well while they might have
different opinions here in theory EU
countries are all bound by the same laws
are signaries to the Rome statute which
is what establishes the international
criminal court and those laws are that
if this arrest this application for
arrest warrant were to be granted
Benjamin Nyah who is really prime
minister would officially become a
fugitive of the ICC and that would mean
EU countries would in theory be obliged
to arrest him should he come to their
territory we are not in anywhere near
that position yet however that is the
potential Road forward and I asked the
European commission's Foreign Affairs
spokesperson about this and he really
seemed to me highlighted just that
importance of compliance with official
international law obligations take a
listen to what he said to me the
European Union respects the independence
of the ICC this is independent
International institution that deals
with the investigation of the of the
serious crimes that uh that uh tries to
deliver on the issue of impunity or
prevent that there is impunity when it
comes to violations uh which uh fall
under the remid and the Mandate of the
ICC and again all the countries that
subscribe to the Rome statue of the IC
have the obligation to follow that in
light of what we just heard how will
this affect the eu's credibility if a
warrant is
granted so it should be noted that we
are still at the stage of an application
and there is no timeline or deadline so
ICC judges will now decide whether or
not to move forward with this war and if
it is granted and if EU countries decide
to Sher their official obligations under
international law you can bet there will
be
a louder clamoring accusations of the EU
uh exerting double standards basically
having different applications of
international law we know for example
the EU was quite uh vocal in welcoming
the arrest warant which was issued for
Russian President Vladimir Putin however
one analyst put it to me this way he
said look the West has there's no kind
of Monopoly from the West on double
standards here and we have certainly
seen countries in other parts of the
world also really tying themselves in
political knots over what to do about an
ICC arrest warrant that was the case for
example when there was discussion over
whether South Africa should welcome
Russian President Vladimir Putin to a
summit of the brics alliance instead in
the end his foreign minister went and
years before that also in South Africa
there was a debate over whether to uh
whether to arrest Omar Al Bashir who is
the suspected war criminal from Sudan so
this is not something which is unique to
EU countries but certainly something
which could be a great source of
political controversy moving forward DW
correspondent Rosie burchard live from
Brussels